---
layout: post
title: "how to decode base64 text"
author: "alex"
categories: til
tags: [til]
# image: oxford-blue.jpg
---

What I learned on May 25, 2023 while trying to get a Backend Software Engineering job

---

A lot of systems don't transmit plain binary data over networks. There are many systems that would misinterpret incoming binary data as control commands or something. Others are designed to always expect plain text. Idk a lot about this. But apparently sending raw binary over the wire is not common practice.

So before transmitting data it is encoded into a set of characters. A commonly used [set of characters is base64](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Base64). There are versions of this set but here's one,

- A-Z have values 0-25
- a-z have values 26-51
- 0-9 have values 52-61
- the "+" character has value 62
- the "/" character has value 63
 
For a total of 64 unique characters.

Note that this is different that the ASCII character values. [In the ACII character table](https://www.rapidtables.com/code/text/ascii-table.html)
 
- A-Z have values 65-90
- a-z have values 97-122
- 0-9 have values 48-57
- the "+" character has value 43
- the "/" character has value 47

There are more characters in the ASCII table. 256 total.

---

So we might receive a string that looks like this, `YmVydC1sZWFybnMtYmFzZTY0`. If we know it's base64 encoded, how do we _decode_ it? Here are the steps,

- Remove trailing `=` signs. `=` signs are used to pad the string when _encoding_ to base64 in order to meet bit requirements. Notice that `=` is not in the base64 character set. In this example no padding was added so we remove nothing.
- Convert each character in the string to it's _base64_ integer value. So `Y` is `24`.
- Convert each of these integers into its binary value. So `24` is `11000`
    - Note that this is a 5-digit binary sequence. Base64 requires 6 digits (`2^6 = 64`).
    - In the case of `24` we simply didn't need the 6th digit, but we'll add the leading `0`s to get the 6-bit word, `011000`

Now we have 6-bit words representing integer values 0-63, which in turn represent characters in the base64 spec.

The ASCII spec has 256 possible characters though. So how can we make sure we can convert any base64 character into an ASCII character?

Well, we note that to represent 256 unique characters we'd need 8-bit words (`2^8=256`). So we pad the full binary sequence of the entire input string with trailing `0`s until the entire length of the string is divisible by 8.

Then,

- Convert 6-bit words into 8-bit words. If the first 3 6-bit words (representing `Y`, `m`, and `V`) are `011000 100110 010101`. Then the 8-bit conversion gives us `01100010 01100101 01.....`. We just borrow bits from the next word to complete each 8-bits word. The trailing `0`s we added will come into play when we form the last 8-bit word.
- Convert each of these 8-bit words into their integer value. So `01100010` gives us `98`
- And finally, convert each of these integer values to an ASCII character. For `98`, we get `b`

When we decode the entire string `YmVydC1sZWFybnMtYmFzZTY0` we get `bert-learns-base64`.

---

Idk how important this is since there are packages that do this for you. But it also serves as an example of encoding/decoding, which is a common enough process. I've seen SSH keys and other secrets with trailing `=` and assume that a similar process happens there. 

---

Here is the python code to do the above. It's not well written but it works for the cases tested. 

    import re


    def strip_padding(in_str: str) -> str:
        return in_str.split("=")[0]

    def convert_base64_char_to_index_int(in_str: str) -> list:
        digits = [str(digit) for digit in range(10)]
        indexes = []
        capitals = "[A-Z]"
        
        for char in in_str:
            if char == "+":
                indexes.append(62)
            elif char == "/":
                indexes.append(63)
            elif char in digits:
                # this method of finding the int value of a base64 char is kinda interesting
                indexes.append(ord(char) - ord('0') + 52)
            elif re.search(capitals, char):
                indexes.append(ord(char) - ord('A'))
            else:
                indexes.append(ord(char) - ord('a') + 26)
        
        return indexes

    def convert_int_list_to_binary_str(int_list: list) -> str:
        # remove prefix 0b
        # pad to 6 bits
        binaries = []
        for num in int_list:
            binaries.append(str(bin(num)[2:]).rjust(6, "0"))
        binary_string = "".join(binaries)

        return binary_string

    def convert_binary_str_to_8_bit_binary(binary_str: str) -> list:
        bit_words = []
        true_length = len(binary_str) - (len(binary_str) % 8)
        slow = 0
        fast = 8

        while slow < true_length:
            bit_words.append(binary_str[slow:fast])
            slow += 8
            fast += 8

        return bit_words

    def convert_8_bits_to_int(bit_words: list) -> list:
        return [int(word, 2) for word in bit_words]

    def convert_ints_to_ascii(int_list: list) -> str:
        plain_list = []
        for num in int_list:
            plain_list.append(chr(num))
        
        return "".join(plain_list)

    def main():
        # user input keeps going until empty string is passed
        while True:
            try:
                user_input = input()
                
                if user_input == "":
                    return
                
                stripped = strip_padding(user_input)
                # print(stripped)
                stuff = convert_base64_char_to_index_int(stripped)
                # print(stuff)
                binary_string = convert_int_list_to_binary_str(stuff)
                # print(binary_string)
                binaries = convert_binary_str_to_8_bit_binary(binary_string)
                # print(binaries)
                ints = convert_8_bits_to_int(binaries)
                # print(ints)
                plain = convert_ints_to_ascii(ints)
                print(plain)
            except EOFError:
                return

    if __name__ == "__main__":
        main()

Here are some other strings to decode

- `dHJ5aW5nLWl0LW15c2VsZg==` -> `trying-it-myself`
- `bGVhcm4taW4tcHVibGlj` -> `learn-in-public`
- `cnVubmluZy1weXRob24tMy44Ljk=` -> `running-python-3.8.9`